Three Critical Innovation Lessons from Apple
by Scott D. Anthony
May 18, 2010
Tweet
Post
Share
Save
Buy Copies
Print
It was September, 2005. I was fresh off of a workshop with a media company where the company’s CEO noted, “Trees don’t grow to the sky forever.” The company’s core business was strong, but the CEO told the group it had to innovate to sustain success in an increasingly turbulent environment.

A couple of days later, I was talking to my colleague Matt Eyring. He said, “So Scott, you’ve been a big supporter of Apple over the past few years. What do you think about buying some stock?”

“Trees don’t grow to the sky forever,” I told Matt.

Whoops.

Since late 2005, Apple’s stock has quintupled. With a market capitalization of close to $250 billion, Apple is (at least today) the third most valuable company in the world, behind ExxonMobil and Microsoft.

It’s a stunning story that’s been dissected to death, but still remarkable enough to warrant reflection. Ten years ago — three years after Chairman and CEO Steve Jobs had returned to “rescue” Apple — the company was still largely treading water, with a relatively meager $3 billion market capitalization. Its personal computer products had a loyal following in niche markets, but that was about it.

Over the past decade, Apple has launched five legitimately game-changing innovations:

The iPod. The elegant MP3 player that started Apple’s decade of disruption.
iTunes. Beautiful software with a powerful business model that showed that people would in fact pay for music if the price was right and the interface was simple enough.
The iPhone. Dubbed the “Jesus Phone” by supporters, a smartphone that three years later still hasn’t been matched by rivals.
The AppExchange. Sure, no one needs 98 percent of the apps that Apple offers, but wow, what a selection.
The Apple Store. The quietest part of Apple’s revolution, today close to $2 billion worth of goods move through Apple revolutionary stores.
Many expect the iPad to be Apple’s sixth big success. It’s still too early to tell (and, as noted before, I’m waiting for the twist), but watching my four- and two-year old children play around with our iPad leads me to believe the device has only scratched the surface of its disruptive potential.

That’s not to say the next decade will be as great for Apple as the past decade. It now has to think hard about how to manage conflicts that will emerge at the intersections of its businesses. The company will inevitably find it hard to maintain its growth rate as revenues approach $100 billion.

Looking back, my mistake in dismissing Matt was pretty simple. I didn’t count on the impact of items three through five on the list above. It’s a natural enough mistake. The number of companies that have organically created three distinct multi-billion dollar new businesses in a decade is pretty short.

And if Apple had indeed stopped at the iPod, my advice to Matt would have appeared smarter. After all, iPod sales have slowed over the past few years as that market has approached saturation. But Apple’s brilliance has been to relentlessly push the pace of innovation.

Reflecting on Apple’s decade of disruption highlights three critical lessons:

Don’t just focus on building beautiful products. Build beautiful business models, new ways to create, deliver, and capture value. The iPod and iPhone would not have had nearly as much impact if they hadn’t been matched with iTunes and the AppExchange respectively.
Think in terms of platforms and pipelines. Competitors that chase Apple’s latest release find themselves behind when six months later Apple introduces its latest and greatest offering.
Take a portfolio approach. While Apple has been on a phenomenal run, not everything it has introduced has been a home run. For example, Apple TV hasn’t had the “revolutionary” impact that Jobs predicted upon its launch in 2007.
Many companies I’ve spoken to dismiss the learning from Apple’s success. “Apple has Steve Jobs,” they’ll note. “We don’t.”

Of course, Jobs has been a central player in Apple’s success. It’s indeed unlikely that Apple could have been as successful without such a visionary, charismatic leader. But my own view is that the “black box” of innovation has cracked open, making innovation success more widely available.

Innovators around the world — whether they are intraprenreurs working for large companies or entrepreneurs set out to create the next great business — can meaningfully increase their odds of success by drawing on the increasingly deep pool of academic research and case examples. Whether they wear mock block turtlenecks is up to them.